# Gramps 6.0 upgrade guide

Gramps 6.0 was released on March 19, 2025. Since it uses a new family tree database schema compared to Gramps 5.2, additional steps are necessary when upgrading Gramps Web to be used with Gramps 6.0. This page describes the necessary steps.

!!! info
    Last updated: May 5, 2025


## Overview of the steps


This is an overview of the steps required to upgrade. 
It also shows which steps are executed by the administrator of the Gramps Web server, the owner of the family tree, and whether it's needed only for users of the [sync addon](../administration/sync.md)

Server administrator | Tree owner  | Action
----|----|----
&nbsp; | ✓ | Back up your family tree
&nbsp; | ✓ <sup>1</sup> |  [Synchronize Gramps Web with Gramps Desktop](../administration/sync.md)
✓ |  | [Update Gramps Web](update.md)
&nbsp; | ✓ | Update the tree's database schema
&nbsp; | ✓ <sup>1</sup> | Update Gramps Desktop
&nbsp; | ✓ <sup>1</sup> | Install the updated Sync Addon
&nbsp; | ✓ | Back up your family tree
&nbsp; | ✓ <sup>1</sup> | [Synchronize Gramps Web with Gramps Desktop](../administration/sync.md)


<sup>1</sup> Only needed if you synchronize Gramps Web with Gramps Desktop.


## Overview of the release status

The following table gives an overview of when the components needed for Gramps Web with Gramps 6.0 have been released.

Component | Released
---|---
Gramps 6.0.1 | 2025-04-18
Gramps Web API 3.0.0 | 2025-05-04
Gramps Web (Frontend) 25.5.0 | &ndash;
Gramps Web Sync Addon 1.3.2 | 2025-04-30
SharedPostgreSQL Addon 0.1.12 | 2025-03-20


## Detailed steps

This section provides more details about some of the individual steps above.

### Back up your family tree

In Gramps Web, go to the "Export" page and select "Gramps XML (family tree)" (the default option). Click "Generate" and wait until the download of the .gramps file starts.

You can also create a backup in Gramps Desktop [in the usual way](https://www.gramps-project.org/wiki/index.php/How_to_make_a_backup).

### Update the tree's database schema

When you access Gramps Web for the first time after having upgraded it, you will be presented with a screen showing the message: 

> The Family Tree you are trying to load is in a schema version not supported by this version of Gramps Web. Therefore you cannot load this Family Tree without upgrading its schema. This action cannot be undone.

You can now click on the button "Upgrade Family Tree". It will show a progress bar and should not take more than a minute to complete. Don't worry, if you accidentally close your browser window, the conversion will continue in the background.

!!! warning
    If you use a non-standard setup *without* background task queue, the database upgrade might fail and your family tree might get corrupted. You can check (before updating Gramps Web) if you are using a background task queue by going to the "System Information" section in the settings and making sure it has "task queue: true".


### Update Gramps Desktop

Follow the Gramps Desktop installation instructions for your operating system.

### Install the updated Sync Addon

You can use the Plugin Manager in Gramps 6.0 to install the Gramps Web Sync addon. Search for Gramps Web Sync, click on install, and restart Gramps.