# Hosting media files on S3

Instead of hosting the media files of the family tree on the same server as the Gramps database, they can also be hosted on Amazon S3 or a different API-compatible object storage service. This strongly reduces storage and traffic requirements for the Gramps Web server.

## Preparing credentials

In your AWS (or other object storage service) account, get an *access key ID* and *secret access key* (you may first want to create a separate user with a security policy allowing only access to S3).

## Upload media files

To upload your existing media files to S3, on Linux you can use a local Gramps installation with the S3 Media Uploader Addon.

!!! info
    The S3 Media Uploader Addon is still under review. You can download the development version from [this repository](https://github.com/DavidMStraub/addons-source/tree/s3/S3MediaUploader).

The addon uses the `boto3` Python library under the hood. You need to install it first with

```bash
python3 -m pip install boto3
```

Next, install the addon by copying it to the [plugins folder](https://www.gramps-project.org/wiki/index.php/5.1_Addons#Manually_installed_Addons).

On the command line, export the access key ID and secret key to the appropriate environment variables:
```bash
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=my_access_key_id
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=my_secret_access_key
```

Now, you can start the uploader by runing the following command,

```bash
gramps -O "My Family Tree" -a tool \
    -p "name=s3uploader,bucket_name=my_bucket_name"
```

replacing "My Family Tree" with the name of your family tree and `my_bucket_name` with the complete name of your S3 bucket. You will need a dedicated S3 bucket for your Gramps Web instance. If the bucket does not exist yet, the S3 Uploader Addon will attempt to create it.

## Synchronizing media files

To keep media files in sync between a local Gramps installation and S3-hosted Gramps Web media files, in the future the Gramps Web API Sync Addon will support file synchronization via the Web API.